The subdivision of main vegetation types into vegetation types is based on the relative uniformity of characteristics such as soil type, plant cover and steepness of slopes. Climate is the most important factor that determines a veld type, but as the division becomes smaller, as in the case of vegetation types, other factors such as soil and physiographic factors become more important. The vegetation type represents the smallest practical unit of subdivision with reference to farm planning. If a main vegetation type is too small to make subdivision worthwhile, it can be regarded as a vegetation type. 

Sometimes when clearly different communities of limited extent can be recognised, it is termed subvegetation types. In practice, they are not separated unless they are regarded as particularly valuable to make separate fencing worthwhile. 

A sound general knowledge of the most important plant species will help to recognize the differences in a topographic complex. 

The most important general climatic and veld differences within a topographic complex can be summarized as follows:
 
3.1.1	Mountains 

3.1.1.1	Plateau veld 

The soils are moderately deep and stable. Temperatures are usually a bit lower, rainfall is a bit higher and mist may occur, evaporation is slightly lower and moisture conditions are therefore more favourable in comparison with lowlying areas. As a result of the more favourable moisture conditions, there is a tendency towards grassveld development. On the other hand the altitude and wind makes the climate more unstable which can be detrimental for grassveld in comparison with lower lying areas. In high rainfall areas the veld is often sour and unpalatable as a result of the leached soils and the low temperatures. 

3.1.1.2	Slopes 

The soils are usually shallow and unstable depending on the steepness of the slope and the parent material. The soils are not clayey and have a high infiltration rate, but the water holding capacity of the soils are sometimes restricted by the shallowness of these soils. On the other hand soils on slopes are usually covered with large stones or boulders which increase the effectivity of the rain. If 50 percent of the soil surface consists of stones, 10 mm of rain will have double the wetting effect compared to soil without stones. Furthermore, these stones help to combat evaporation, runoff and erosion, so that moisture conditions on these slopes are above average. Therefore, there is also a strong tendency towards grass and large shrubs in Karoo areas. The vegetation differs from sparse cover on steep shale slopes to fairly dense cover on moderate doleritic slopes. With the exception of slopes high above sea level, the vegetation is fairly palatable. 

There are marked differences in the vegetation of the different aspects. These differences are mainly due to the inclination of the suns rays and the prevailing winds. Western slopes are drier than eastern slopes mainly because they face the dry western winds and the afternoon sun. In dry areas such as the Karoo, southern and northern aspects are about equally palatable, but southern aspects produce more feed. In high rainfall areas southern slopes show a strong tendency towards forest development and become poor grazing. 

3.1.1.3	Kloof (ravine cleft) 

The characteristics of kloofs are basically the same as for slopes but the vegetation may differ markedly because kloofs are usually more sheltered against cold winds. In some exceptions kloofs act as drainage channels for cold air. Each kloof has automatically two aspects which usually differ. 

3.1.2	Hills 

3.1.2.1	Dolerite- and Granitic Hills 

The characteristics of hills are about the same as that of moderate slopes. The soils are usually sandy, moderately deep and fairly stable. The many stones on the soil surface help to combat soil erosion and to make the veld fairly resistant to overgrazing. As a result of the differences in aspects and steepness of slopes, hills usually have a very mixed vegetation of fairly good quality. As a result of the above average moisture conditions there is a strong tendency towards grassveld in hills, especially doleritic hills. 

3.1.2.2	Sand stone hills 

The soil is sandy and fairly vulnerable for erosion.  The soil has an average fertility and under optimal conditions, it will have a good coverage of mix grass, bushes and shrubs.  The grazing capacity is fairly good.

3.1.2.3	Unstable mud stone and shale hills 

Less soil, but more gravel is found.  The slope is steep with erosion. Water retention is poor as well as the production potential.

3.1.3	Apron veld 

Apron veld is a transitional stage from mountain veld to plains. The soils are relatively deep and sandy with clay underlayers and are usually a good example of transported soils. The moisture conditions are slightly drier than slopes and hills, but better than those of plains. The soils are fairly stable but vulnerable to erosion when overgrazed. In the Karoo the vegetation of apron veld ranges from predominantly grassveld to predominantly Karoobushveld, depending on the moisture conditions. Apron veld is of moderate quality and palatability. 

3.1.4	Bulteveld

Very similarly to hills. The general topography is waving and not as high as the hills.  The soil is shallow and stony.  

3.1.5	Plains (flats) 

Plains are usually divided into two vegetation types namely: 

Dry plains and
Ordinary plains 

This division is mainly based on soil type and soil depth which is very closely related to moisture conditions in the soil. It is often very difficult to make this division. 
The following can be regarded as general characteristics of plains: 

The soils are generally relatively shallow and clayey. The soils are generally not stony; but in the Karoo the shallow soils usually lie on top of a gravel layer. There is usually an accumulation of mineral salts which precipitate in the lower soil layers to form hard lime pans. Where there is considerable accumulation of salts, plains are often called brakveld or saline veld. The vegetation of brakveld consists mainly of Karoo bushes which are, very palatable and nutritious. Brakveld can also, depending on the local conditions, be classified as "leegteveld". 

As a result of the flat nature of plains the soil is relatively stable with regard to water erosion, but very vulnerable to wind erosion. There is little natural protection and shelter for plains so that big temperature variations also occur. 

The vegetation consists of mixtures of Karoo bushes and low producing grass. As a result of the exposure to the direct rays of the sun and the dry winds, the evaporation on plains is relatively high. This, together with the general shallow soils, leads to under average moisture conditions and a resulting sparse cover. As a result of the flat nature of plains, the soil is relatively stable with regard to water erosion, but very vulnerable to wind erosion. There is little natural protection and shelter for plains, so that large temperature variations occur. 
The vegetation consists of a mixture of Karoo bushes and low producing grass species, e.g. awn grasses and love grass. The Karoo bushes are generally palatable and nutritious, but the production of plains is low. 

The most important differences between ordinary plains and dry plains are caused by the soil and are reflected in the vegetation. They can be summarized as follows: 

3.1.5.1	Dry plains 
 
The soils are shallow, moisture conditions are poor and the vegetation consists mainly of a good Karoo bush component with annual and inferior perennial grasses. 

3.1.5.2	Ordinary plains 

The soils are shallow to moderately deep; moisture conditions are a little better than for dry plains, but still under the average and the vegetation consist of a good Karoobush component with a moderate stand of tough perennial grasses e.g. fine seedgrass and blue seedgrass. 

3.1.6	Leegteveld 

Leegteveld represents the most valuable main vegetation type on a farm. In general, leegteveld can be described as veld which received an additional moisture supply apart from the natural rainfall. The nature and amount of this additional moisture determines mainly in which vegetation type the veld will be classified. The classification is therefore again based on moisture conditions in the soil. 

3.1.6.1	Brakleegtes 

Brakleegtes represent the driest type of leegteveld. The soils are usually deep, loamy to clayey and usually contain high concentrations of mineral salts. It is periodically flooded by runoff water from higher areas, but not regularly. The vegetation consists mainly of deep rooted shrubs which are fairly salineresistant. The Gannas are typical examples of such shrubs. On the sandier and wetter patches, grasses can make up a considerable part of the vegetation. The vegetation is very palatable and with a high nutritive value. 

The soils are fairly resistant to water and wind erosion if the vegetation is maintained. The vegetation is fairly resistant against overgrazing, but if it is overgraze, brakish bare patches usually develop. On these patches the water absorption rate of the soil becomes very low and wind erosion becomes an important factor. It is extremely difficult to get vegetation back on these bare patches. 

Further, the spreading of dry gullies from the main channel must be watched very carefully. These dry gullies are difficult to control and act as draining channels which drain the surrounding soil. 

3.1.6.2	Moist vleis 

Moist vleis are flooded regularly by natural runoff water. The soils are not so very saline or brakish because much of the mineral salts are leached out by the regular flooding. The soils are deep and loamy, but often consist of several layers of clay, silt and sand, deposited by water over the years. The moisture conditions are usually very good and the vegetation consists of a dense perennial grass cover and the shrubs usually found on brakleegtes. 

In some moist vleis the water table can be as shallow as 7  10 metres, which can be reached by many plants. The veld has a high production and is also palatable and with a high nutritive value. 

When this veld is mismanaged it becomes very susceptible to erosion and can easily be drained by channels and gullies to such an extent that the grass cover is lost. 

Moist vleis are extremely valuable as a natural drought reserve and with proper management they can give a grazing capacity of more than twice that of natural veld. 

3.1.6.3	Water course

Deep, well drained, structureless soils.  The production potential is high with moderate erosion vulnerability.  Under optimum conditions the grazing capacity is high with a dense grass coverage.

3.1.6.4	Channels

Channels usually cause the biggest problems because they tend to drain the surrounding soil and it is difficult to prevent them from extending.  With careful management and the aid of mechanical works it is usually possible to establish plants like fluitjiesriet in the channel.  The plants will catch sediment which will turn the dry channel nto a wet channel which is a much better proposition.
3.1.7	Summary

The various vegetation types mentioned in this chapter differ with regard to the nature of the vegetation, palatability and accessibility.  It is therefore quite obvious that within a number of vegetation types some will be grazed more than others. To eliminate the dangers of overgrazing on the most palatable veld, it is important and necessary that the different vegetation types should be fenced off as far as practically possible.

